Create changes-ee-5.4.md (#2274)
emqtt/emq-docs-cn: en_US/changes/changes-ee-5.4.md

  export them to the configured Open Telemetry collector or back-end.

- [#11935](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11935) Switch to the new `v2` routing store schema by default. New schema improves both subscription and routing performance, especially so for scenarios with concurrent subscriptions to topic filters sharing common wildcard prefixes, at the cost of slightly increased memory usage. This schema also eliminates the need for a separate index, thus inconsistencies in the routing state rarely encountered in previous versions should no longer be possible.

  If a cluster is rolling upgraded from older version, the cluster will continue to use `v1` store until a full cluster (non-rolling) restart happens.

  The former schema can still be forced by setting `broker.routing.storage_schema` configuration option to `v1` and conducting full non-rolling cluster restart as well.

- [#11984](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11984) Implemented Open Telemetry distributed tracing feature.

- [#12017](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12017) Implemented HTTP API for configuration and user data import/export.

> - [#12040](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12040) Upgrade QUIC stack, more features on the way!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#12040](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12040) Upgraded QUIC stack.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- [#11608](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11608) Integrated the LDAP bind operation as a new authenticator.
```

- [#11766](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11766) Implemented a preliminary Role-Based Access Control for the REST API.

  In this version, there are three predefined roles:
  - Administrator: This role could access all resources.

  - Viewer: This role can only view resources and data, corresponding to all GET requests in the REST API.

  - Publisher: This role is special for MQTT messages publish, it can only access publish-related endpoints.

> - [#11773](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11773) Support audit log filter via dashboard (http api).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11773](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11773) Implemented support for audit log filter via dashboard (http api).
```

> - [#11778](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11778) Support Azure Entra Id for saml single sign on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11778](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11778) Implemented support for Microsoft Entra ID in SAML single sign on flow.
```

> - [#11811](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11811) Improve the format for the REST API key bootstrap file to support initialize key with a role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#11811](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11811) Improved the format for the REST API key bootstrap file to support initializing key with a role.
```

  Replaced old license issued in Jan 2023.
  New license supports up to 25 concurrent connections.

### Bug Fixes

- [#10976](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/10976) Fix topic-filter overlapping handling in shared subscription.
  In the previous implementation, the storage method for subscription options did not provide adequate support for shared subscriptions. This resulted in message routing failures and leakage of routing tables between nodes during the "subscribe-unsubscribe" process with specific order and topics.

- [#12048](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12048) Fix COAP gateway bug that caused it to ignore subscription options.

- [#12078](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12078) Upgrade grpc-erl to 0.6.12

  grpc-erl 0.6.12 fixes a potential deadlock that was possible because grpc client started dependent apps lazily.

- [#12081](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12081) Updated `gen_rpc` library to version 3.3.0. The new version includes
  several performance improvements:

  - Avoid allocating extra memory for the packets before they are sent
  to the wire in some cases

  - Bypass network for the local calls

> - [#12111](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12111) Fix an issue where API tokens were sometimes unavailable by using sync_transaction function to ensure all updates are consistently synchronized to the replica node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#12111](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12111) Fixed an issue when API tokens were sometimes unavailable immediately after login due to race condition.
```

> - [#12121](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12121) Fixed occasionally return stale view when updating configurations on different nodes concurrently

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#12121](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12121) Fixed an issue with nodes in the cluster occasionally returning stale view when updating configurations on different nodes concurrently.
```

Wording is still not good enough, I just tried to make it more clear.

> - [#12158](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12158) Fix the issue that the rule engine cannot connect to `upstash` Redis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#12158](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12158) Fixed an issue when the rule engine cannot connect to Redis hosted by Upstash.
```

  Before the fix, after establishing a TCP connection with the Redis service, the Redis driver of EMQX used [Inline Commands](https://redis.io/docs/reference/protocol-spec/#inline-commands) to send AUTH and SELECT commands. However, the `upstash` Redis service does not support Inline Commands, which causes the rule engine to fail to connect to the `upstash` Redis service.
  After the fix, the Redis driver of EMQX uses RESP (REdis Serialization Protocol) to send AUTH and SELECT commands.

> - [#12176](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12176) Ack the DISCONNECT packet to MQTT-SN client regardless of whether the connection has been successfully established.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#12176](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12176) Always acknowledge `DISCONNECT` packet to MQTT-SN client regardless of whether the connection has been successfully established before.
```

- [#11935](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11935) Switch to the new `v2` routing store schema by default. New schema improves both subscription and routing performance, especially so for scenarios with concurrent subscriptions to topic filters sharing common wildcard prefixes, at the cost of slightly increased memory usage. This schema also eliminates the need for a separate index, thus inconsistencies in the routing state rarely encountered in previous versions should no longer be possible.

  If a cluster is rolling upgraded from older version, the cluster will continue to use `v1` store until a full cluster (non-rolling) restart happens.

  The former schema can still be forced by setting `broker.routing.storage_schema` configuration option to `v1` and conducting full non-rolling cluster restart as well.

- [#11984](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11984) Implemented Open Telemetry distributed tracing feature.

- [#12017](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12017) Implemented HTTP API for configuration and user data import/export.

- [#12040](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12040) Upgrade QUIC stack, more features on the way!

> - [#12089](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12089) Added a technical preview of the new persistent session implementation based on RocksDB.

Author: ```suggestion

```

>   Please note that this feature is in alpha stage and must not be enabled in the production systems.

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   Features missing in the early preview version of the new persistent session implementation:

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - Shard failover

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - Retained messages

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - Will message handling

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - Shared subscriptions

Author: ```suggestion
```

>   - Subscription IDs

Author: ```suggestion
```

- [#11766](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11766) Implemented a preliminary Role-Based Access Control for the REST API.

  In this version, there are three predefined roles:
  - Administrator: This role could access all resources.

  - Viewer: This role can only view resources and data, corresponding to all GET requests in the REST API.

  - Publisher: This role is special for MQTT messages publish, it can only access publish-related endpoints.

- [#11773](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11773) Support audit log filter via dashboard (http api).

- [#11778](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11778) Support Azure Entra Id for saml single sign on.

> - [#11795](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11795) Integrated Nari Syskeeper 2000 as a new bridge backend.

Author: ```suggestion
```

# Releases

## e5.4.0

> ### Enhancements

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Enhancements

- [#12201](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/11994) Support hot update of TCP/SSL/WS/WSS MQTT listeners configuration.

  This allows changing most of the configuration parameters without restarting the listener and disconnecting the clients. The limitations are:

  - For TCP/SSL listeners, changes to the following parameters still require listener restart and clients reconnect:
    * `bind`
    * `tcp_options.backlog`

    - For WS/WSS (WebSocket) listeners, changing transport related parameters will cause listening socket to be re-opened, but established connections will stay uninterrupted.
	 * `bind`
	 * `tcp_options.*`
	 * `ssl_options.*`
```

  Also added the ability to revert to the default trial license by setting `license.key = default`. This option simplifies the process of returning to the trial license if needed.

- [#12129](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12129) Default license renewal. Replaced old license issued in Jan 2023. New license supports up to 25 concurrent connections.

### Bug Fixes

- [#10976](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/10976) Fixed topic-filter overlapping handling in shared subscription.
  In the previous implementation, the storage method for subscription options did not provide adequate support for shared subscriptions. This resulted in message routing failures and leakage of routing tables between nodes during the "subscribe-unsubscribe" process with specific order and topics.

- [#12048](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12048) Fixed COAP gateway bug that caused it to ignore subscription options.

- [#12078](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12078) Upgraded grpc-erl to 0.6.12. This update addresses a potential deadlock issue where the grpc client started dependent apps lazily.

> - [#12081](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12081) Updated `gen_rpc` library to version 3.3.0. The new version includes several performance improvements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#12081](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12081) Updated `gen_rpc` library to version 3.3.1. The new version includes several performance improvements:
```

  
  - Avoiding allocating extra memory for the packets before they are sent to the wire in some cases.
  

>   - Bypassing network for the local calls.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Bypassing network for the local calls.

  - Avoid senstive data leaking in debug logs [#12202](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12202)
```

- [#12111](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12111) Fixed an issue when API tokens were sometimes unavailable immediately after login due to race condition.

- [#12121](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12121) Fixed an issue where nodes in the cluster would occasionally return a stale view when updating configurations on different nodes concurrently.

- [#12158](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12158) Fixed an issue when the rule engine cannot connect to Redis hosted by Upstash.

  Before the fix, after establishing a TCP connection with the Redis service, the Redis driver of EMQX used [Inline Commands](https://redis.io/docs/reference/protocol-spec/#inline-commands) to send AUTH and SELECT commands. However, the `upstash` Redis service does not support Inline Commands, which causes the rule engine to fail to connect to the `upstash` Redis service.
  After the fix, the Redis driver of EMQX uses RESP (REdis Serialization Protocol) to send AUTH and SELECT commands.

> - [#12176](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12176) Always acknowledge `DISCONNECT` packet to MQTT-SN client regardless of whether the connection has been successfully established before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#12176](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12176) Always acknowledge `DISCONNECT` packet to MQTT-SN client regardless of whether the connection has been successfully established before.

 - [#12180](https://github.com/emqx/emqx/pull/12180) Fix an issue where DTLS enabled MQTT-SN gateways could not be started, caused by incompatibility of default listener configuration with the DTLS implementation.
```
